# Worn-out-tyre-detection
Traffic accidents are a major public safety concern worldwide, causing physical injury, property damage and ultimately loss of life. (World Health Organization 2022). Whilst other factors contribute to traffic accidents, worn-out tyres are a causal agent to these accidents. They reduce the vehicle's grip on the road surface, resulting in loss of control and longer braking distances, increasing the risk of an accident.
Tyre manufacturers recommend replacing tyres every six years or when the tread depth falls below 2mm (Webuyanycar.com 2021). However, many drivers fail to regularly check the condition of their tyres and worn-out tyres remain a significant risk on the roads. Detecting worn-out tyres on vehicles can reduce traffic accidents, and several methods have been proposed to address this problem. Traditionally, expert visual inspection of tyres has been the primary method of detecting tyre wear. However, this approach is time-consuming and painstaking and may be almost impossible on a large scale. In recent years, machine learning algorithms, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have shown promising results in detecting objects in images and videos, including tyre wear detection. CNNs are deep neural networks developed for image processing and are particularly useful for object recognition tasks. They have been used in various applications including facial recognition, traffic monitoring and autonomous vehicles. Applying CNNs to detect worn-out tyres can significantly reduce the time and cost involved in detecting tyre wear, making it more feasible to implement on a large scale (Vasan et al., 2023).
Previous research has used OpenCV and CNNs to detect blasted, old, and torn tyres (Kishor Kumar Reddy, Anisha & Madama Mohana 2021). In their study, they changed the image from BGR to RGB and applied a bilateral filter to blur the noise and distortion around the dataset. They achieved an accuracy of 90.9%. Praful Dabekar et al., (2018) focused on using sensors and colour coding to assess tyre wear. Siegel et al., (2018) made use of DenseNet to create a model to detect tyre wear, achieving an accuracy of 78.5%.
How this research differs from the related works listed above is that the Canny Edge detection algorithm was implemented to assess how the models perform with edge detection, reduce noise and determine the accuracy of the model with this approach.
This approach can be integrated into existing vehicle inspection systems, providing a cost-effective and reliable solution to detect worn-out tyres. A classification report and confusion matrix are then done to evaluate the results of our models and tests to determine how accurate the models are.
